---
title: 'Atlas of Weak Signals'
slug: 'atlas-of-weak-signals'
hero: './hero.jpg'
date: '2019-03-15'
endDate: '2019-04-14'
lastUpdated: '2019-04-18'
people:
  - name: Jose Luis de Vicente
    website: https://about.me/jldevicente
  - name: Mariana Quintero
  - name: Lucas Peña
    website: http://lucaslorenzopena.com/
  - name: Ramon Sangüesa
    website: https://twitter.com/ramonsang
published: true
---

I found narrative speculation to be a fun exercise in imaging possible futures. However, due to the short time frames we had to develop them, I found them lacking in providing tangible learning outcomes or informing further design action. Also, in some cases, it seemed to me that we ended up trivializing serious issues because of the lack of thorough analysis. While the exercises have certainly been engaging I did not feel they have furthered my knowledge in a constructive way.

## Strong weak signals

Before this course started, I have expected that the students are going to be the ones creating a repository of weak signals, so I was surprised to find out they were basically entirely under the direction of the course tutors.

Looking at the list of the topics I was left rather underwhelmed. Firstly, I was already familiar with most of the themes presented to us. That would not be much of an issue if the themes were genuine weak signals. But for the most part, the chosen themes were widely medialized and discussed in the public realm in recent years, even decades and centuries in some cases. They were simply phrased using pompous wording.

Fields of critical theory, feminist studies, epistemology, semiotics, ecology, philosophy and many others have been addressing these issues for a long time now. That does not mean we should not continue the discussions with a fresh perspective informed with newly generated knowledge. Yes, the climate crisis is very real, and it has been real for the past 70 or so years. Yes, unprecedented systemic changes are required for humanity to even have a chance of saving itself and the planet Earth. But the fact that most of humanity is in denial and is just now waking up to the fact does not make it a weak signal. That makes it a strong signal that has been willfully ignored.

Again, I would like to reiterate that all the themes presented in the course are undeniably the most important questions of our times and they merit deep conversations. But I was hoping that we would go beyond what the whole world is talking about and explore the depths of emerging underground esoteric streams of thought.

I would argue that many of the areas of interest that my colleagues from the course are exploring are the actual weak signals of the current era. Many of them got deep enough in their research that they are starting to uncover people and communities that are working on truly novel ways of being. Yet these groups and their ideas are virtually unheard of beyond the confines of tiny primarily online bubbles.

People growing furniture out of mycelium, writing eco-speculative solarpunk stories, exploring the possibilities of urban farming and hydroponics, playing with metamaterials – these are just of the themes that we have been researching in our class and they are the actual weak signals that will eventually turn into planetary trends.

## Interspecies what?

The theme most clearly related to my intervention was that of *interspecies solidarity*, that our group decided to rename as *interspecies collaboration* because we found the term solidarity to evoke somehow unappealing, overly dogmatic connotations.

I have been struggling with terminology related to this topic myself. I would go beyond business-sounding *collaboration* and lean more towards ethereal terms such as *synergies* and *symbiosis*.

In our presentation, a pigeon is narrating various news stories. It had a great crowd-pleasing effect but it epitomizes the main struggle I have been experiencing while researching this area – and that is that of anthropomorphistic world view inherently present in all our discussions about non-human living organisms.

In my own project, I have been exploring the possibilities of giving voice and legal rights to plants. On a pragmatic level, it might sound reasonable, but on a deeper epistemological dimension, it represents a very limited and reductionist perspective of the biological world. After some deliberation and research, I have learned that since these ideas are being generated by humans being, they will always by definition be anthropomorphistic. The only way to move beyond it is to merge our minds with other organisms and experience non-humans forms of being. From where we currently stand there are two principal ways to do this.

The first method is to escape the confines of our bodies and egos through a closer engagement with indigenous ways of knowing or the synesthesia-atic experiences induced by psychedelics or mind-altering techniques such as holotropic breathwork, which have a long-standing historical tradition particularly in indigenous cultures around the globe. I have deliberately avoided this angle up to this point, but based on [the discussions I had during the second term presentations](/reflections/continuing-the-dialogues/) I have decided to openly address this rather obvious connection to my project. Coming back to this particular course, a major resurgence of medical and psychological research into psychedelics and its potential therapeutic effects, can be seen as a weak signal.

Secondly, on a more speculative note, the exponential advances in the field of synthetic biology suggest that we might be able to merge with plants and other non-human organisms through techno-scientific means in relatively near futures. Rather than a cyberpunk android-like aesthetic, I'm imagining something akin to the direct planetary link to the nature that the Na'vi tribe has with its planet in the movie Avatar. Or developing a language that would let us effectively communicate and collaborate with plants as explored in the sci-fi book [Semiosis](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/35018907-semiosis). Again, relating it back to the course, such imagery falls under the umbrella of eco-speculation and *solarpunk* – a term I have recently discovered and coincidentally listened to a talk about it on this year's [IAM weekend](https://www.internetagemedia.com/) – another weak signal.

## What is your symbiotic real 

To conclude, I would briefly like to explore the term *symbiotic real* used by [Timothy Morton](https://www.wikiwand.com/en/Timothy_Morton) to describe the inseparable connection and participation of humans in the context of the wider ecosphere; it stems from the critique of the use of word ‘nature’ which arbitrarily separates humans from the rest of the living systems surrounding us. In other words, there is no separate nature somewhere out there, we are nature, nature is us. The dire state of nature implies a dire state of humanity. By fixing ourselves and our relationships to others we will fix nature as well.